if you haven't read the recap from
module three I'd encourage you to go
back and make sure you have a pretty
good feel for it before you continue
with this because I want to start
talking about that puzzle that I raised
at the end of that recap and it has to
do with both how do corporations get
away with external izing all sorts of
harms on to the rest of society and
relatedly how corporations grown to be
so large and powerful they're related
right because the answer to the first
puzzle seems like it should be that
they're able to get away with this harm
because they with perpetrating these
harms because they're so big and
powerful but that just led to the
question of how they got that way the
one sort of answer that was offered by
the documentary said that the problem is
that we don't restrict corporations
nearly enough and they said that we need
to restrict corporations much much more
maybe get rid of them
Karsen and long offer a different
account and so today we turn to a
different sort of explanation of
corporate harms the the documentary and
here's what it is in sort of thumbnail
sketch the documentary says that we need
governments to regulate and get involved
in corporations much much more
Karsen and long say that the problem is
the fact that court that governments are
regulating and so involved
with corporations so the documentary
said that governments may need to get
rid of corporations Carson and long say
that government action promotes the
successes of corporations and if they
would just stop doing that then
corporations would probably just go away
on their own because they wouldn't be
competitive so that's the kind of answer
this the the Carson and long answer that
want to investigate this week and we can
start with thesis the thesis says market
competition will force firms to be
ethical at least to be ethical enough
capitalistic competition according to
this thesis corporations can literally
lie cheat and unfairly exploit their way
to high profits according to this thesis
corporations have to be ethical in order
to maximize profits in order for
corporations to be successful they have
to serve people in order for
corporations to be successful they have
to convince people to hand over their
money to them and people are only likely
to hand over their money to them if
these corporations are offering a good
or decent service and if they're not
they would take their business elsewhere
if corporations are doing bad things
people would take their business
elsewhere if they aren't serving them
adequately they would go elsewhere and
the unethical corporations would be
punished punished by the market
penalised by the market why work for a
corporation or buy stuff from one when
they regularly treat their customers or
their employees really really badly
such corporation
we'll fail the problem with this thesis
is that it's obviously false right there
are just way too many examples where
this does not happen so the question in
those kinds of cases in the these most
of the cases the question is how
corporations are able to get away with
this
how does an institution that by alright
should only do well should only be
profitable when it serves others and
well and treats them fairly how would
they manage to survive in cases when it
regularly does the opposite
so that's just another way of stating
the puzzle the puzzle is sort of like
this thesis should be right but it's
obviously not so what's going on so
couple questions about corporate power
and the harms that corporations are able
to perpetrate on the rest of society
these harms the documentary referred to
as externalities so they're
externalizing certain harms or costs on
to the broader society they're
concentrating the benefits and the form
of profits on themselves and they are
dispersing socializing the harms onto
the rest of us so where does the power
of their power to do this come from how
are they able to get away with it
and under what conditions would their
power to do this be sustainable and so
in order to answer these questions and
in light of the fact that the initial
thesis is so implausible
we need to offer a revised thesis
o here's the revised thesis the market
will force firms to be ethical enough
unless corporations are able to insulate
themselves from competitive market
pressures so the idea here is that
corporations can't lie cheat and
unfairly exploit their way to maximize
profits they have to be ethical in order
to maximize profits unless these
corporations are somehow able to lower
the cost associated with this unethical
behavior so the questions that we need
to ask are whether we can think of any
reasons why corporations would want to
insulate themselves from competitive
market pressures and the second question
can you think of any ways corporations
are able to insulate themselves from
competitive market pressures so this is
what long is addressing these kind of
questions and he says well why well
because corporations fear competition
competition exerts a downward pressure
on the prices that corporations can
charge their products and competition
exerts an upward pressure on wages that
corporations would have to pay in order
to retain good employees so competition
in a very real way threatens the firm's
survival and even more intuitively right
if corporations can do less to serve
customers to take care of employees to
bring some product to the market they
can do less in order to get this job
done and at the same time generate the
same amount of revenue then obviously
they would want to do that so what it
does what about that a second question
how right how do they insulate
themselves from market forces and long
develops answer according to which the
way they're able to do this is by
securing government privilege what kind
of government privilege he talks about
many but they come in the form of
subsidies bailout provisions corporate
welfare special tax provisions
protectionist tariffs barriers to entry
on the part that restrict competition
from entering into competition with them
monopoly rights licensing restrictions
having a domain tax breaks and so on we
will also talk about some of these
things we'll talk about later in the
semester of intellectual property
provisions protections against lawsuits
these kinds of things can encourage
certain kinds of environmental harms and
for harmful products to be able to be
presented to the market even
privatization schemes more often than
not look like grants of monopolies
rights than they do like a stabbed an
establishment of a genuine competitive
market so here's I mean you've probably
heard about Pharma bro Martin Xu Kelly
he's in the news at the end of 2015 and
even more recently when he was being
been investigated for some other things
for security as securities fraud but he
was just being questioned by Congress
and the best way to understand the case
where he first gained
significant notoriety its when he
purchased a corporation took under his
corporation took over a company that was
selling dareth daraprim and he raised
the price of a pill of daraprim from
something like $13 per pill to something
like 750 dollars per pill and the best
way of understanding how he was able to
get away with this is that because of
FDA regulations he was his company was
the only one in the United States that
was certified legally permitted to sell
daraprim and when you have a state
granted monopoly privilege
you can charge basically whatever you
want so here's here's lungs
here's lungs version of the thesis
government privilege translates into
corporate power which gives rise to all
sorts of social harms it gives them the
ability to privatize benefits
concentrating them on themselves while
dispersing the cost socializing them on
the rest of society they they can get
away they can't get away with harming
society without the granting of
government privilege these privileges
insulate them from competitive market
pressures and without the power that
they derive from grant so government
privilege it would be much much harder
it would at least be much much harder
for corporations to harm their customers
or their employees or the general public
according to long bring too long these
privileges these privileges or
protections there they permit businesses
to turn into the kinds of externalizing
machines that the documentary talked
about Carson offers a slightly more
technical version of this argument
according to which what he's really
trying to do is explain how corporations
got so large again is a I talked about
this at the in the recap for module
three but it's a puzzle that
corporations are able to get so large
especially given the hackey and thesis
that when you have when you try to plan
the allocation of scarce resources among
competing ends without the benefit of
the information provided by a
competitive price system then you should
expect to make those decisions
inefficiently you should expect to miss
allocate resources and when you miss
allocate resources you should not be
able to be successful you should your
your competitiveness should suffer and
so what good what goes on when you
incorporate a business is you take that
transaction out of a competitive market
and you bring it under the umbrella of a
hierarchical vertically integrated firm
that that should restricts the kind of
information that you have about the
efficient allocation of that resource
but again same so it's a kind of an
analogy argument if it's really really
hard for a centrally planned economy
under for example
complete socialistic economy to plan
then it should also be for a really
really large corporation and for the
exact same reasons so this is just the
kind of argument that we talked about
when we talked about hi X knowledge
problem thesis so Hayek says that how
are we going to allocate scarce
resources among competing ends in a way
that will accord with consumer demand in
a market-based system consumer
valuations of first-order goods are
translated that means by consumer goods
by are translated by means of prices
into the varying demand for the factors
of production these are the productive
goes the capital that's needed to
produce those first-order goods right
but if you have a system according to
which the state owns all the factors of
production all the means of production
that means that there will be no market
in and so no prices for producers good
and so there would be no way to transmit
this information and that means that
state economic planners can't plan
efficiently so what what Carson is doing
is he's taking this kind of argument and
saying that the same sort of dynamic
should apply to a really big vertically
integrated hierarchical firm the bigger
it becomes the less the decision makers
in the firm are able to plan efficiently
so Carson says I'm going to apply this
analysis to corporations because there
are no market prices within a
corporation right to calculate the
profits and losses of each branch of a
big firm
what what the decision-makers have to do
is look to the external markets for the
factors of production and the
intermediate products and make decisions
based on that but that kind of
information is is less reliable it's not
generated by a competitive pricing
system because again there are no
competitive market prices within a
corporation so how do you allocate
scarce resources among competing ends in
a way that accords with consumer demand
within a corporation how do you
calculate the profits and losses of each
branch well it matters how big a firm is
because again and this is the stuff that
we learned from coast when you allow a
firm to grow to some extent that is
efficient in as much as it economizes on
external transactions costs but all the
time as you get larger and larger the
savings on transactions costs are being
balanced against the inefficient
allocation of resources that results
from taking that transaction out of a
competitive environment so when the
external transactions costs are higher
than the internal transactions costs and
by internal transactions cost I just
mean the difficulty of making these
allocation decisions without sufficient
knowledge whenever the external
transactions costs are higher the
company will continue to grow and still
maintain its efficiency but if the
external transaction costs are lower
than the internal transactions cost the
company will have to downsize because it
will be less competitive it will be slow
and lumbering and inefficient and it
won't be very competitive Thanks so like
we said at the end of the lecture
on cose unco PSA's essay on the nature
of the firm the size and the scope and
firm's operations will be determined at
the margin the very next set of
transactions that you add to what the
corporation is already doing every time
you add more to that it becomes less
efficient and if it's sir at a certain
point right it starts you see it starts
to be a losing proposition so what
happens when a firm grows so large when
a firm grows large enough but its
internal operations become insulated
from the price system and these
diseconomies of scale but the
inefficiencies of growing so big begin
to outweigh the economies of scale the
efficiencies that you gain from growing
to a certain extent because you're you
are saving on certain kinds of external
transactions costs what happens when it
when it passes its natural limit you
expect it to start to do worse but the
real answer the real answer is it
depends on the background institutional
environment right again you would expect
them if the firm grows too too large and
to the point where they become
inefficient allocators of their scarce
resource you would expect them to shrink
in a genuinely free market if the firm
doesn't catch wise and start scaling
back on its growth it'll grow
increasingly inefficient and so it would
lose consumer customers to its
competitors and so markets under this
analysis serve as a kind of automatic
check on the size of the firm but but
what if what if friendly politicians
rigged the game so that some
corporations are able to secure govern
privileges and reap the benefits
associated with growth while at the same
time socializing the costs that are
associated with growth - they derive all
the benefits from being big because
they're saving on these external
transactions costs but they're insulated
from competitive pressure and so at a
certain point doesn't really matter if
they're inefficient because there isn't
any competitive pressure that should
that is forcing them to be efficient if
they're able to secure these benefits
and privileges from the state these
these ways in which they can be helped
to be insulated from competitive
pressures they can just continue to grow
and grow and grow and we might just end
up with an economy maybe a world that's
dominated by these bloated bureaucratic
hierarchical corporate behemoths that we
all know about the ones that are
responsible for all the kinds of social
harms that the documentary talks about
so I mean there are some examples that
we can talk about right so one kind of
example would be the British Petroleum
Gulf oil spill that happened I don't
know how long it's been now but in the
wake of this oil spill in the Gulf of
Mexico what did the government do one of
the first things that it did was put a
cap on the liability that British
Petroleum Corporation could be subject
to that means that BP didn't have to pay
for the entire costs of the harm that
had perpetrated
that is in effect a subsidy of directly
from the government to the corporation
allowing them to remain competitive
allowing them to be a dominant and huge
corporation even though they had just
done something quite negligent and
terrible even more recently were the
bailouts the financial for financial
corporations and say like 2008-2009 and
so on
this is when the corporate the financial
corporations were on the brink of
failure for having made really unwise
investment decisions and instead of
instead of letting them fail the
government took them to be too big to
fail and bailed them out this if this
has got to be if you you're a
corporation and you win when you're
competitive that is you're profitable
when you do a good job but you're also
competitive and profitable when you do a
bad job right the incentives for trying
too hard to do a good job have got to be
affected one thing that we'll be talking
about in a later module is the notion of
regulatory capture and one way of
accounting for the fact that regulations
that are in place corporations are
subject to lots and lots of regulations
but they tend to be regulations that
help big established firms be insulated
from new entrants from new competitors
and so one way to under to make sense of
this this the effect of the regulations
that we have is this notion of capture
regulatory agencies of the government
which are supposed to be created to
protect people from industry end up
serving the established interests in
that industry to the detriment of
consumers potential competitors who are
disadvantaged by the regulations and of
course everyone else to the extent that
these the the to the extent that these
large corporations end up perpetrating
all kinds of social harm and so I'm
gonna I'm gonna close with this this
nice encapsulating quote from Carson's
essay that that kind of puts a little
bow around his thesis and presents it in
a pretty clear way he says that the
problem is that the state by
artificially reducing the costs of large
size and restraining the competitive ill
effects of these Hayekian calculation
problems this serves to promote larger
size than would be the case in a free
market by that he means a genuinely free
market and with it
calculation problems to a pathological
extent the state promotes inefficiencies
of large size and hierarchy past the
point at which they cease to be worth it
that allows it to grow even more from a
standpoint of net social efficiency
because those people who are receiving
the benefits of large-sized are not the
same parties who pay the costs of the
inefficiencies who pays the cost of the
inefficiencies we do society does the
solution is to eliminate the state
policies that have created the situation
and allow the market to punish you
efficiency so return to the idea of the
thesis again competitive markets will
would would if they would only exist if
competitive markets would force firms to
be ethical or at least ethical enough
and this this quote here explains the
reason why why it's why it's not true